[Music]
we're live
hey everybody i'm live here with uh
mr ivan zard of ambala ciel
from youtube um and we're here to talk
about a variety of stuff let me just
start by uh are we
are you on check check check i'm happy
to be here man and i'm happy you're
still in the game
it feels like all these years later i
don't know if it's two years later two
and a half years since we first talked
but yeah it's
i really i'm just happy to see her still
in the game and happy to be here i'm
happy you're in the game
yeah it's been a while yeah you must
know a lot of people who disappeared you
must have known a lot of talented people
who were on a microphone and a camera
whatever three years ago and where are
they now you never find out right
yeah and some not so talented people too
yeah
but yeah we should so i want to um we're
going to talk a little bit more about
who you are and what you do
uh but just to summarize it real quick
for anybody who doesn't know you're sort
of i would
well i don't know if you have how you
would just uh describe yourself but i
would consider you
among other things sort of an internet
commentator with no
particular specialty whether it's
science
or politics or history maybe not so much
science but politics history
internet drama anything that you find
interesting here
like from my perspective everything i do
is politics and it has been like i'm not
offended by that description but like to
give you an example
like when i talk about batman i'm
talking about politics
it's a very political video talking
about the new batman movie so for me
it's all politics
but i don't distinguish high culture
from low culture
so for me talking about batman or
talking about rap music or talking about
some things going on within
uh youtube whether that's anission or a
jaclyn glenn or one of these people
i take that seriously and in some ways i
take that
you know it's just as seriously or more
seriously than for example some canadian
politician
who's gonna come and go and may not
really change the world as much as the
new batman movie or
somebody like jacqueline glenn but yeah
from my perspective it's all political
interesting so okay um let me ask you
this this is kind of a thing i've been
thinking about lately which is
we're going to jump into this we'll get
back to talking more about your who you
are and your career and stuff but since
you brought this up
uh and you identified yourself as a
political commentator is that fair to
say
sure sure all right um i've been
thinking about this lately like how much
people are talking about politics
obviously with the election coming up
and everything that's going on
but it's like it's a word that you hear
so often but i don't know how often you
hear it defined
so from your perspective i imagine it's
something kind of subjective and
different people would probably define
it differently but how do you define
the word politics great great question
great question i think that the question
of ethics
ethics is about how do i lead a good
life
and politics is about how do we lead a
good life
you know now normally with politics
you're talking about at least a couple
hundred people
not just a few dozen but sure even at a
small scale that's really what politics
about how do we
together live a good life and it may be
a society of dozens it may be a society
of thousands or maybe a society of
millions
yeah okay it's interesting so politics
to you is connected to
like ideals of what is a good life and
how do we institute that amongst large
groups of people i guess
or the lack of ideals you know i
identify as
a nihilist i'm a very pragmatic and
non-idealistic person
but those questions are still really
really pressing
so yeah and indeed you know again i'm
not being sarcastic when i say
oh let's give you an example to stick
with batman you know when i
taught university classes in china i
asked the students seriously
you look at batman you look at
spider-man
do you think this is a story that
parents
should teach children do you think this
is a story we should use in classrooms
as teachers and you know not in a
trivial way like let's let's really
think about what this teaches children
so yeah those are questions about how we
together can live a good life or
form a good society um you don't
you don't have to believe in anything
you don't have to be idealistic to
really wonder about that
and look around at trying to come up
with new answers
do you think that many people consider
because i'll just think of going back to
your definition of politics
it seems reasonable to me i mean i'm
still kind of grappling with what
exactly i would define that as or what
it means
but i don't think i mean do you think
the average person sees politics like
that or
or do you have an idea of what the
typical perception is of that concept of
politics yeah
you know so we're talking mostly about
white western english-speaking people
here it'd be a different answer for
japan or india or cambodia but i think
if you're talking about white western
english-speaking people
they mostly inherit a political identity
the same way they inherit a religious
identity
you know um why are you conservative why
you remember the republican party or
some of that very often though
the real answer is that that's because
their parents taught them to be that way
or their grandparents thought to be that
way
and they put very little thought into
what politics is or what they're rolling
it ought to be
uh now a really great question would be
what percentage the population is an
exception to that rule
you know and i'll just mention also so
like you know you could call what i do
political entertainment
you know you know like uh that might be
insulting but i don't mind being
insulted
but you know if i'm making entertainment
it's for those people also look i don't
look down my nose with them i think
there were a lot of people who've never
really questioned
who they are politically or what they're
doing or what politics means to them
they've just been carrying on doing
what their parents and grandparents
expected them to do and still
you know there could be something really
meaningful they encounter on my channel
and they
you know i get email from some of those
people and that that could be something
really meaningful for both of us
you know but yeah you could divide
society into two classes of people those
who've really come up with their own
answers to those questions
and those who've never thought about it
they're just carrying on the same
pattern
handed down with their parents and
grandparents
all right i i kind of get the impression
a lot of people think of politics is
just kind of like
powerful people arguing or something
like that yeah
um right right right well no but look i
mean what if what if you live in
communist china
you know one of the reasons why most
chinese people are incredibly
ignorant of politics is that they're so
far removed from it that they really
that
in communist china today i'm talking
about 2020 not the past
that definition would make a lot of
sense and the most
the greatest role you can play as a
member of the public is to kind of
follow those debates
from around the edges and you know
people like military generals might be
quite
important in chinese politics and find
out what these people in the military
saying and what
other significant figures in the
dictatorship are saying
um you know i would say to a country
like egypt
how much of a role really can you have
in in politics
uh egypt was always teetering on the
edge of uh
between democracy and dictatorship there
are countries where that definition
would make a lot of sense and would have
a lot of gravity i think
all right let's take a little step back
here
let's talk about um your channel in
general
so you've got a youtube channel you've
been doing for what
yeah over five years you have over five
years and we're coming up on five
million views now
i think it's 4.7 million views all right
and from my understanding you specialize
more in vegan specific
stuff and then you've kind of more
expanded and i see you doing a lot less
vegan content these days yeah
that is absolutely true uh the very
beginning of my channel i assumed it was
going to be an atheist channel
so i i am an atheist in case people
hadn't guessed and the name of the
channel even
refers to that about yell sort of sense
of like
tearing god down out of his heaven and
that's what that means
it means this is an over translation
this is uh expanding a little bit but
yeah so in french
a ballet is like let's tear down the
government let's turn on the state a
ballet
that's quite often used in political
protests and a
is used less often it would normally
mean let's tear down the church let's
tear down religion
but it literally means let's tear down
heaven let's tear heaven out of the sky
so a very kind of ambitious um
atheist political meaning so yeah the
the channel started off with that and i
had um
i had just formally quit buddhism i'd
been a scholar of buddhism for
i like to say 10 years so i was
interested in the critique of buddhism
and the critique of religion and there
was a lot of that popping on youtube at
that
time and i was really aware of the
success of people like the amazing
atheist
people all the time insult me saying i'm
not good-looking enough to be a youtuber
and i say
well you know i i was partly inspired by
the amazing atheist i don't think you
need to be that
to be successful on youtube but yeah
there was then a long period where
when you and i first spoke um
i was really trying to just make friends
in veganism
and where that i know it sounds very
simple but making friends in the vegan
movement
was the main thing i was doing with my
channel for a couple of years and that's
now well and truly over
so you see veganism comes up once in a
while but
um put it this way these days i wear
veganism
like a shirt but i don't wear it like a
tattoo
okay interesting so can you i i imagine
it's a i know a little bit about your
uh in your the goings-on with you in the
vegan community
a vague idea but just uh without going
so without it's probably very
complicated but without going too
in-depth can you give us like a break a
general
summary of how you kind of decided to
step away from that or what happened
between you and the vegan community i
know there's a lot of controversy but
yeah well
the controversy is fun to talk about i
don't mind we can talk about that
but the the i mean in terms of if you
want to start at the end in terms of
stepping away
i really just felt there was a total
lack of talent i mean as you said
earlier there's some talented people
some not so talented people
um going through all that controversy i
felt the positive part of it was that i
met and spoke to kind of everyone in the
vegan activist scene definitely everyone
who speaks english
and all those people know me even the
people who pretend they don't know me
they know me they know my work
and that was a good thing about
controversy was it it did connect me to
all those people
years and years went by something i used
to say to people a lot five years ago
was where do you want to be five years
from now what are your goals what are
you planning to do in the next five
years and then what are we gonna do
like together to get there and five
years went past
and all those people have accomplished
nothing and they're not
trying to accomplish anything um so no
in terms of my stepping away from it
i have formally said that i quit the
vegan movement i still i still eat a
vegan diet
but i've said that i quit vegan activism
which was a big turning point for me
personally
uh you know i i did literally shed some
tears giving up on that
um you know that was really deciding
okay that chapter in my life is now
over um but you know the the actual
controversies
some of them were very shallow and very
silly
some of them were very serious i've
always wanted to be honest about the
things that other vegans were being
dishonest
and evasive about it's like a real
simple example that i think people in
the audience can relate to
i think most people who are not vegan
right now
a lot of vegans pretend that they don't
kill rats
that they never would kill a rat that
they never would kill a cockroach
and that was something right off the bat
my youtube channel said no i'm going to
be honest about this
i'm vegan i kill rats even if i have the
delusion that i don't kill rats
my landlord kills rats when i go to the
hospital there are no rats at the
hospital
because the hospital is employing you
know a pest control company
and they kill the rats at the hospital i
buy groceries
and the groceries are produced at a farm
that kills rats no
our society's built on killing rats
we're going to keep on killing rats
let's really be honest about this and
let me know we can philosophize about it
we can talk about it
um you want to we can shed a tear about
it or something
yeah oh yeah oh yeah and they came and
they came after me right
so those people all hate me no and there
are people and they keep rats in their
apartment as pets
and they let you know that rats are just
as intelligent as a three-year-old human
child
and they love rats and if only i kept a
pet rat
i would understand and oh yeah there
were people who like
break into laboratories and steal the
rats that scientists are doing
experiments on
and liberate and then keep yeah yeah
yeah there were rat people let's put it
that way
yeah yeah yeah they're hardcore man one
woman wrote to me she's a middle-aged
woman now
and um you know she wrote to me and i i
googled her and i was scrolling through
her past
social media presence i said hey look i
appreciate that you're now a fan of my
channel but i can see just a couple
years ago
you were you were one of those rat and
she joked around but
you know it's tragic it's true like i
appreciate that i'm not going to say
rats don't have feelings
but we kill rats and uh 10 years from
now
50 years from now 100 years now we're
still going to be killing rats so let's
let's not lie to ourselves yeah yeah i
mean
i don't i try not to kill like spiders
and stuff i don't think it's it's crazy
to not want to kill a rat but i but it's
interesting that of all the things you
could spend time
doing activism for the rats but
yeah yeah yep all right so
okay so wait we're still talking about
the
so what happened with the vegan
community uh okay well i mean you know i
went through a series of of
controversies but as i said i
i saw that as more positive than
negative the one that
you know had the biggest impact
financially
was the controversy with durianrider
that ended up in court
so if people don't know at that time
durianrider's girlfriend freely was
getting
about 12 million views a month
on youtube so she was that was a big
youtube channel
and i don't know if maybe durianrider
was doing 2 million or 4 million a month
like he was big but he was very much in
her shadow
and the controversy was attached to both
of those so i had a major vegan youtuber
who made up the allegation that i was a
pedophile out of thin air
he specifically made up the allegation
that
he had spoken to underage girls directly
who had provided him with evidence of
this
that he was going to take the police he
was going to have a gang of people beat
me up and drag me to the police
and if you want to know what's the basis
for this conflict
he was a vegan youtuber who made
exaggerated health claims about the
benefits of the vegan diet
and this included but was not limited to
his claim to have cured crohn's disease
so that was one that was really harsh
with him like you know
okay if you want to make vague
statements that the vegan diet help you
lose weight or something i'm not going
to go after you
but no crohn's disease is a really
serious disease and i was just saying no
this is something dangerous and bad and
evil and wrong to mislead people
suffering with this disease that we can
cure it through eating more bananas
that's not true and everybody knows
somebody who's got crohn's disease by
the way i mean it's
yeah so anyway well just so you know you
can't cure it with bananas
so okay so so you so yeah so that's so
that's one example
sorry go ahead yeah well did he was it
like a direct retaliation to that or had
you built up sort of you criticized him
multiple times and then he started like
looking for dirt
that was really the turning point no i
mean i would say that really directly
did
yeah create the the conflict and
you know he's also someone who was
trying to make his living
out of giving that kind of diet and
health advice so it's not
you know i mean i can kind of understand
it from his perspective unfortunately
it's an insane and evil perspective but
i can understand perspective
i just want to give him credit where
it's due today 2020
five years later he has apologized to me
he offered to delete all the videos and
all the
blog posts that were denouncing me and
calling me a pedophile
he has yeah so that's five years later
he did the right thing
um sorry maybe it was four and a half
years later when that started but many
years later he did at a turning point
so that stuff is gone from his channel
unfortunately the damage is done
uh for my career and my life in many
ways the flip side of that is
as i said before these controversies
they put me in touch with
really all of the leading vegan
activists and vegan youtubers
um so i i got to find out what i was
missing
in terms of the movement so yeah there
was a very briefly there was a
fundraiser
people donated i think six thousand five
hundred us dollars so that i could have
a lawyer and take him to court
we went to court uh defamation uh
lawsuit or whatever you want to say
criminal charges for defamation
so yeah you were he was
the defamation charges were against him
for what yes yes
yeah yeah because he he defamed me
claiming that i was a pedophile
among other things he made he made up a
lot of other lies
and no i mean you used a good term
before you said so did he get angry and
go digging for dirt
like i wish i wish he'd done any digging
it was it's all just fantasy
and the stuff he was saying about me a
lot of it like it doesn't make sense
geographically you know and the last
time i talked about i've talked to him
about it was just a couple days ago i
think like three days ago i talked to
him about this
and he seemed to genuinely have no
memory of what he'd said
i could provide him with screenshots and
so on but
my impression of durianrider is that he
is a genuinely mentally disabled man
he has said in court under oath that he
has brain damage
and he's talked about that on youtube
from a bicycle accident he had some kind
of serious
brain damage from a you know concussion
to his head
and you know he may have had other
mental problems before that and again i
could just say he's talked a lot about
his own
mental health history and learning
disability history and so on
but that as crazy as it sounds he seemed
to be sincere
and not really remembering what he said
and most of the stuff he made up against
me was in a word
crazy but i got to see how crazy all the
vegans were because they all jumped on
they all wanted to believe it
and you know that's obviously that's a
very disappointing
cross-section of the movement when you
see all those people lining up to
denounce you and make up
stories about you um you know
i mean anyone if if you were you know if
you were part of buddhism which i used
to be and you had that experience you'd
then look at your fellow buddhists a
little bit differently
well you know i had to learn to look at
my fellow vegans a little bit
differently too
so so was it a series of controversies
and how this was all handled that kind
of soured your
like is that kind of what happened was
you you i'm gonna be i'm gonna be a
hundred percent honest with you i'm
gonna be 100 honestly the answer is no
that's a totally reasonable perspective
you know i am a very very positive
highly motivated person who's happy to
do my own thing even if i think kind of
everyone else is an idiot or everyone
else is against me
so i know like i might be hard for other
people if they don't know me personally
i appreciate that but no
there was one controversy after another
whether it was durianrider
unnatural vegan nina and miranda the
vegan cheetah charles marrow there was
this
long series what need him read his dad
i'm forgetting his name now
jeff jeff nelson all this crap yeah
there was this crazy series of
controversies
one more ridiculous the next but through
all of it i was
happy i was upbeat i was smiling i was
laughing about it like people insult me
on the internet
and i i it like it only it's when it's
wind in my sails like honestly i feel
totally positive about it what broke me
was the lack of talent so two real quick
examples
i wrote a children's story book
storybook's been translated into six
languages tons of people loved this
story book
wanted to get an illustrator for the
storybook could never
find a vegan illustrator who wasn't
completely insane and useless
we dealt with some people who were
insane and let me down and
you know i tried to have a conference
where you get together a bunch of people
and they present papers at a conference
and then we'd gather the papers and
publish them as a book
and grow the lack of talent at that time
i had money in the bank to do that in
vancouver i was going to do it
and um you know the lack of talent
uh made my teeth whiter
so there were things like that that to
me it was just like well look guys i've
been doing this for five years
and i don't have one other person i can
work with or collab on like not even
collab on a youtube video
you know so i thought it's time to it's
time to end the experiment
you know when you if you if you say to
yourself that something's an experiment
you have to accept that the outcome is
unknown
like if you say okay i'm going to do
this as an experiment i'm going to try
flying my flag for vegan activism and
say hey let's get organized let's do
this let's go
go who's with me it's okay i'm going to
do that for five years
but then you have to admit okay well
this was the outcome after five years
you know um i'm all alone and there's
like nobody i even respect or want to
work with or something
so yeah that was what that was yeah that
makes sense i kind of experienced a
similar thing on younow quite frankly
oh yeah because i imagine i would have
stayed there longer if there was more
peers or a sense of like i mean there's
a couple i don't want to discount there
was a few people of course that i
clicked with but i mean if there was
like a strong tightly knit community of
talented people i'm sure that would have
kept me there way longer but there
wasn't
yeah and you know i think you know
something i used to say to people now
like five years ago was look if you
think my videos suck
you know uh leave me in your shadow
eclipse me
like do better like you know get on the
mic and you know show me how it's done
because i would be so happy to have
somebody look up to
you know like having people that are
better than you people you admire
um you know that's that's really that's
really great too
so yeah yeah no no i i feel you you know
whatever your art form
is and the only thing i'd add is you
know for me it became an art form
when i started doing youtube i didn't
really see it that way i used to say i
know
you can probably remember me saying this
for a million years ago you say no for
me this is just like sitting down in a
coffee shop
and talking to a friend uh and you know
it did become an art form became a major
creative thing in my life and that's
that's still what it is which is which
is still possible
you've noticed an evolution in the last
couple of years in particular like you
you do i mean i remember when i first
saw your channel it was pretty much just
like uh you know one long interrupted
yeah
whatever you had in your mind but now
you're editing and you're including uh
you're citing what's it called
sources and quotes and there's a there's
a lot going on and there's uh
yeah interesting so can you let's talk
about that just for a minute i think a
lot of people in here maybe i mean i
know
vegan called quest has a few people in
here who are familiar with your channel
to a degree
but um what's your process like we've
already kind of just given the basic
summary you're making these kind of
political commentary videos but like
how does like a video start and end like
i imagine you see
or read something and then that kind of
gets an idea going and then how do you
get from there to uh
i think nobody but my girlfriend would
really believe how spontaneous it is
that it's like it's so spontaneous it's
crazy and that's like that's the sense
in which i'm good at it
once i sat down in a starbucks i was in
a starbucks and my girlfriend was here
at home
at the apartment and i was like
jenna marbles she's
feeding her dogs
dead cow meat as dog food and that
she says she's vegan
she's buying dead animals all the time
[Music]
oh yeah no and it was and while i was
sitting there
in the starbucks i made the whole video
and the couple of sources i didn't have
i didn't need
i was emailing my girlfriend like hey
can you find this can you find that i
asked my girlfriend can you find the
particular brand of dog food
jenna mar and she did she found it so i
don't know i don't know if that was half
an hour or
we could have been a whole hour sitting
that stuff a lot of work did go into
that video
and i got this music and i got the
visuals and i put it together and
you know and yeah and i got like 500 or
a thousand thumbs down from jenna
marbles fans i don't know we should
check how many thumbs down that that has
now
but you know no and it was it was
totally totally spontaneous and
unplanned that's that's something within
veganism
but all kinds of other stuff i do um
it is extremely spontaneous even talking
about like politics of cambodia politics
of ancient greece and politics of
ancient rome
if there's one thing i've really learned
is that if i if i don't do it in that
spontaneous way
even if the factual content is the same
it will not be the same for me in terms
of its mood or spirit if i go back and
watch it again
even if there's something something
comes up like a friend of mine is dying
of cancer
so it's like i have an idea for a video
and then i can't make it for five days
you know there's some delay like that
when you come back five days later it's
i'm never going to make that video i
made
i would i'm never going to be able to
make the video i would have made if i'd
done that five days before in terms of
what's going on in my mind
all the time i could step out of the
shower something i thought of when i was
in the shower
and that's the video and i gotta make it
now because if i don't i won't capture
that
spirit you know and i i haven't haven't
been real angry lately my youtube
channel is
is consistently more popular when i'm
angry
uh people like the video that also
relates to the amazing atheist thing
i would give i would give that as advice
for someone starting a youtube channel
even if you can come on the mic
hot you can come on the mic angry um
that does reach a bigger audience for
whatever reason
but you know that anger is maybe an
easier emotion to to understand you know
if you're angry about something
then you know make the video while
you're angry don't do it later
don't pretend to be angry you know but
when you're feeling that way when you're
feeling yeah
yeah put it together so yeah even even
the most dry intellectual videos
um i did a couple in the history of
science the videos i made talking about
sir isaac newton
they were completely spontaneous like
that too so yeah
um and i i think nobody would believe
how spontaneous and unplanned all that
stuff is
okay so you just you have the idea you
record it and then anything else that's
seen in the video you're doing that
after that's like post-production for
you
you're not like planning things out
elaborately in advance or anything
okay even if there is planning it all
happens at the same time like it's all
thrown together
yeah like yeah i i think that shows
yeah pretty much but i think that's what
one of the things i like about channel
okay so let's talk a little bit because
so this the jenna marbles video clearly
was controversially presentation was
i want to talk a little bit about your
sort of bluntness because you're very uh
you know you're i consider you a very
thoughtful person you do
you think about a lot of issues you do a
lot of reading and research and what
have you
but in terms of uh concern for
let's say offending your audience you
seem to have none
and i wonder what your sort of
perspective is on that in this day and
age
with the seemingly uh major
emphasis on political correctness and
all this kind of stuff you used to be
willing to kind of say things that
you you also seem very aware that these
things you say are potentially going to
offend people or that they're
controversial and
i i don't get the impression that you
care um i don't have like i guess a
specific question but i wonder if you
could kind of talk about that a better
word
well i i i'd only disagree with your
wording um
because no i mean it's an energy point
like i understand i
agree with the fundamental point you're
making but i do care i'm actually a very
caring person and that's also why those
videos are made in the way that they are
so whatever the issue is like racism
against
first nations people or the black lives
matter movement
like even if these videos are offensive
and they are to some people
even my videos talking about learning
chinese and the history and politics of
china believe me
those videos would be offensive to some
people you you know you're not a member
of the chinese communist party but about
a billion people are
they'd find what i have to say about
chinese people as offensive
or blunt or you know inconsiderate about
my audience's feelings as those things
may be
i just made videos talking about judaism
and anti-semitism
i'm ethnically jewish myself i'm
completely aware my channel can be
deleted
for those videos like those are
offensive enough in really talking about
what's wrong with judaism
i know i know this is going to hurt
people's feelings you know
and i've had i had a couple of uh
orthodox jews who were fans of my
channel
and i know because they used to write to
me trying to convert me they were like
hey come on join orthodox judaism
because they know i'm genetically
genetically jewish whatever that means
um
i do care a lot of it comes from a place
of caring
and it goes to a place of caring and
that's one of the reasons i reach out to
and talk to my audience is that i really
care i care about them
and i care about the issues however
everything else you're saying is
completely true
that it is very offensive it hurts
people and
for better and worse it changes people's
lives
if you're asking why i think it was a
question is why why is that my format or
why is that my aesthetic
i would say it really has to do with the
total sense of
of rage or outrage i have
toward canadian society and
i'm really kind of screaming out my
sorrow and bereavement at
in the face of the indifference of
canadian society
just as i would say voltaire the author
of voltaire was screaming out this way
when he wrote candide about what he saw
as just the
unbelievable unbelievable evil
that was thought to be good or normal in
the society that he that he lived in
now why do i say that i used to live in
germany
i used to live in cambodia i used to
live in thailand i've lived in
many different countries around the
world probably probably if i had stayed
in any of those countries probably if
i'd stayed in south korea or japan
i probably wouldn't be like this i
probably wouldn't be living this way
i wouldn't have this sense of of uh you
know
real real bereavement um
and that it really is you know my status
as a dissident
in canada and let me just mention you
know
cops with me here i deal with cops
face to face you can probably just guess
from the tone of my voice
i'm very good at dealing with cops who
try to intimidate me or try to bully me
i'm someone who has a background that
lets me do very well in canadian society
on that surface level
so people might not suspect how
extremely unhappy i am here i'm
extremely happy i am with status quo
but my point is again it's not that i
have some kind of standards that are so
high
it's it's totally possible that if i
just stayed in
some other culture that i fit into a
little bit better where i appreciate the
politics and the society a little bit
more i feel more positively
about the society that i'm a part of
that it wouldn't have that
quality but yeah um i'm part so
to stick with jenna marbles i'm partly
pissed off at jenna marbles right
when i'm pissed off at the whole
society it's the society of walking your
dog
and feeding them cow meat and chopping
up pigs
to feed them to your dog and treating a
dog
like a toy taking a wolf and breeding it
to the point where it more resembles a
cat
you know um you know there's
so much about this that's wrong and then
the jenna marbles is celebrated as a
vegan
as a vegan celebrity and a leader in the
vegan movement
so yeah but the deeper underlying
discontentment with the society is
really
really fueling all that so we've got a
lot of
americans i think most of people in the
audience and they don't generally know a
whole lot about canada
and um i'm just kind of and also this is
from my own interest
can you kind of explain you've mentioned
some
animal and vegan sort of issues in what
you're just saying there
i don't know is that the core reason for
your sort of dissatisfaction with
canadian society or others to if to an
american who knows nothing about
these issues that bother you can you
kind of give us a little bit of a
insight into what it is that sure
well i mean for foreign americans
specifically
i think what i draw attention to is this
you americans are very proud that you
fought this revolution
that you wrote this constitution and you
had this civil war
in canada we had none of those three
things we never had the revolution
never the constitution or nor the
declaration of independence
we never had the civil war and yet isn't
it remarkable
how similar conditions are in the two
countries in every imaginable way
yeah i thought about that a lot do you
know why or any other theory on why that
is
yeah i'm writing a book about it right
now i'm on chapter three of my book so
yeah
it's actually something i've been i've
been meditating on a lot lately and and
what i'm
trying to point to is how misleading
these political conceits are
and they're i think in this case i mean
what what have you just mentioned
i think these are political beliefs that
people
acquire in childhood so they're very
similar to religious beliefs people
start believing in the uniqueness of
america and the american constitution
it's like well okay but if that's so
unique why is it that canada is kind of
the same you know in terms of the real
lived experience day to day like i don't
know
walking around seattle versus walking
around vancouver
it's walking around toronto versus
walking around new york city
um it's hard to spot the difference
especially talking about the political
difference
what are the difference in in political
conditions uh it's it's very very hard
to
to pin down so noah that would be kind
of step one if i'm if i'm talking to an
american
and you know step two you know is
probably to appeal to their
their awareness well i come from a
country
that is built on genocide on absolute
cultural genocide it's built on this
british empire system
and this system of overtly undemocratic
parliaments that we call a democracy
you know and i'm a product of an
education system
that i consider absolutely abysmally
terrible
myself so i'm in this position and then
i'll give a third step it's only one
sentence long you know one of the things
i like to remind people of is
you know i'm a canadian citizen
my daughter is not i made the conscious
intentional choice to refuse to allow my
daughter to become a canadian citizen so
i mean
it's one thing if you say like just in
kind of vague nebulous terms that you're
unhappy with canada but know when i had
the choice
uh that was the decision i made is to
put my foot down and say no
i'm so you know these factors in canada
are so real they're so important
i would rather have my daughter growing
up in france going into the french
education system
and being part of a country that isn't
built on genocide
and where they do have a very different
uh history of of revolutions and civil
wars
you can always say so do you feel that
canada is as a country is more um
guilty of of this cultural genocide than
america
um i i think you can look at
canada the united states of america and
australia
as imperfectly parallel cases
um you don't want to get selected from
that conversation quite a bit oh right
sure yeah yeah yeah no sure i mean you
know now
in what ways is canada worse and what
was this canada better i wrote a very
short essay once
pointing out how remarkably similar even
the treatment of indigenous people was
in
russia under joseph stalin and that was
specifically the indigenous people who
are way out east in siberia
and who are both genetically and
linguistically related to our native
people in canada
because that's that's the history of
where they came from they look the same
the dna has proved it
and their languages are related and then
you look at the forced assimilation
residential schools slow motion genocide
policies under joseph stella
now again what does that tell you well
depending on how you look at it you
could say canada's policies were just as
bad as joseph stalin or you could say
joseph stalin's policies were so bad
they're almost as bad as candidates
you know so yeah i mean the the the
compare comparisons are odious
it's worthwhile and you can learn things
from those uh those contrasts
but one that always stuns me is i hear
people claim that japan
is built on genocide against its native
peoples i've done the research i've done
the history i said
what are you talking about you know to
me that's not comparable at all
the history of the internal history of
japan japanese massacred other people
that were conquered japan
japan conquered cambodia and laos and
stuff they conquered thailand
different story but you know um
so no i mean the next question really is
you know what are we doing the
comparison form what are the conclusions
we're trying to come to
it is definitely true that both canada
and the united states
have a system of parliament you know in
one country called parliament in one
one country called congress but we both
have a system of parliament that was
designed
to not represent the indigenous people
from day one and it still doesn't
represent them but obviously if if you
were if you or i traveled back in time
and we started conquering north america
say okay well we'll set up a parliament
and okay so this is new york state at a
time when 90
of the people are indigenous and 10 are
these colonial settlers
what are you going to do you can have a
parliament that only represents
the white colonial settlers you're not
going to give a seat you're not going to
give a voice
to the indigenous people when the when
they're the majority
you know and then step by step they're
snuffed out
they're kicked off their land and so on
and so forth
they're extinguished is actually the
american legal term
extinguishment is the term used in
american law and um
there's no interest in even having seats
for them when they're only ten percent
of the population like even when they're
a tiny minority there's still there's
still no place for them in your
parliament your congress
your your state senate so yeah in that
sense uh
they're very comparable histories in
some ways a little bit better in some
ways like wars
here and there so you mentioned
that you sort of don't yeah i guess
you're not really um
feeling like you like this is the
society that you
so i guess like okay let me just my
question i guess in relation to the way
you feel about canada and how you don't
really like
like you didn't want your daughter to be
raised here you don't really like feel
so great about the history and so forth
is there and then obviously the current
politics i imagine you've also got
issues
is there a country that you do feel like
kind of more represents your
ideals or where you think you belong
more yeah sure i mean
i can give you two examples and they're
both very imperfect
but of course i feel much more positive
about switzerland for example
um oh yeah sure no in terms of actually
having a real
democracy switzerland is a really
positive example
more of us should study and i've always
pointed to my girlfriend just comes up
in different contexts
just even when the news the news is
openly saying
they'll just state as fact on the news
that america is the wealthiest country
in the world and has the greatest system
of democracy in the world it's like
america is not the richest country in
the world but i notice you're choosing
not to compare yourself to say
luxembourg or switzerland
there are countries in europe that are
much wealthier than united states and
also have a much better
quality and depth of democracy but to
give an example that's a little bit
closer to a third world country but
that's still tremendously appealing to
me
uh greece greece is a deeply messed up
country you know teetering on the brink
of bankruptcy so there isn't the wealth
issue like switzerland or luxembourg
what have you
but they care about democracy they're
the birthplace of democracy they're
never mentioned
in these discussions you know it's never
mentioned like hey greece is a place
that that really matters
and um i just say i've been to greece
i don't have illusions that the greek
people are a bunch of philosophers
they watch football and they drink beer
and they eat
meat a lot of lamb kebab you know i mean
there's a lot of things i don't like i
don't like the religion either i don't
like the eastern orthodox christian
religion or something there's a lot
wrong with greece but sure um i'm not
comparing the united states of america
to some kind of
ideal uh i feel that i'm comparing the
united states america to very palpable
real examples
and i mean two more real real quick i
think everyone acknowledges this
japan and taiwan south korea is pretty
positive as an example too
but japan and taiwan are societies
that reacted to being conquered by the
united states of america by out doing
them
and in many many obvious ways both japan
and taiwan
are factually superior societies the
united states of america
quality of education crime rate
quality of democracy you know the the
quality of health care
the health care system in japan or
taiwan compared to the united states of
america
um so no and nobody okay i can't say
nobody
incredibly few people are willing to
just reflect on this and say hey the
position the united states of america
and the world
is not being the world's leader and then
the
position of canada falling along behind
america
is therefore kind of one step back from
america yeah
all right let's talk about cambodia for
a minute i know you've got a pretty deep
uh sort of history with that country and
i've